These authors contributed equally to this work.
Graphical abstract
Highlights
•Fluoride induces hepatointestinal damage by altering bile acid synthesis, transporters, and FXR-FGF15 signal regulation.•Vitamin B2 attenuates fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation dysfunction through IL-17A and ileal microbiome.•Bifidobacterium supplementation reverses fluoride-induced hepatointestinal injury.•VB2 supplementation is an effective strategy for alleviating fluorosis.
Fluoride induces hepatointestinal damage by altering bile acid synthesis, transporters, and FXR-FGF15 signal regulation.
Vitamin B2 attenuates fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation dysfunction through IL-17A and ileal microbiome.
Bifidobacterium supplementation reverses fluoride-induced hepatointestinal injury.
VB2 supplementation is an effective strategy for alleviating fluorosis.
Introduction
Fluorosis is a global public health disease affecting more than 50 countries and 500 million people. Excessive fluoride damages the liver and intestines, yet the mechanisms and therapeutic approaches remain unclear.
Objectives
To explore the mechanisms by which fluoride-induced intestinal-hepatic damage and vitamin B2 alleviation.
Methods
Fluoride and/or vitamin B2-treated IL-17A knockout and wild-type mouse models were established, the morphological and functional changes of liver and gut, total bile acid biosynthesis, metabolism, transport, and regulation of FXR-FGF15 signaling pathways were evaluated, the ileal microbiome was further analyzed by 16S rDNA sequence. Finally, Bifidobacterium supplementation mouse model was designed and re-examined the above indicators.
Results
The results demonstrated that fluoride induced hepatointestinal injury and enterohepatic circulation disorder by altering the synthesis, transporters, and FXR-FGF15 pathway regulation of total bile acid. Importantly, the ileum was found to be the most sensitive and fluoride changed ileal microbiome particularly by reducing abundance of Bifidobacterium. While vitamin B2 supplementation attenuated fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation dysfunction through IL-17A and ileal microbiome, Bifidobacterium supplementation also reversed fluoride-induced hepatointestinal injury.
Conclusion
Fluoride induces morphological and functional impairment of liver and gut tissues, as well as enterohepatic circulation disorder by altering total bile acid (TBA) synthesis, transporters, and FXR-FGF15 signaling regulation. Vitamin B2 attenuated fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder through IL-17A knockout and ileal microbiome regulation. The ileum was found to be the most sensitive to fluoride, leading to changes in ileal microbiome, particularly the reduction of Bifidobacterium. Furthermore, Bifidobacterium supplementation reversed fluoride-induced hepatointestinal injury. This study not only elucidates a novel mechanism by which fluoride causes hepatointestinal toxicity, but also provides a new physiological function of vitamin B2, which will be useful in the therapy of fluorosis and other hepatoenterological diseases.
Keywords
Abbreviations
Alanine aminotransferase
Aspartate aminotransferase
Bile acids
Bicinchoninic acid
Canadian Freelance Union
Divisive Amplicon Denoising Algorithm
Nitrocellulose membranes
Phosphate-buffered saline
Room temperature
One-way analysis of variance
Sodium fluoride
Total cholesterol
Direct bilirubin
Haematoxylin and eosin
Interleukin 17A knockout
Interleukin 17A
Principal component analysis
Riboflavin or vitamin B2
Operational Taxonomic Units
Total bile acid
Total bilirubin
Total protein
Vitamin B2
Wild type
Introduction
Fluoride is present in a wide range of natural and artificial environments, including groundwater, soil, food, pharmaceuticals, and cosmetics [1]. Long-term and excessive fluoride ingestion via groundwater or other environmental media has caused acute and chronic fluorosis in more than 50 countries, including China, India, the US, Australia, Pakistan, Canada, Mexico, Yemen, Saudi Arabi, South Korea, Indonesia, Iran, Sri Lanka, Turkey, etc., resulting in a global public health problem [2], [3]. For instance, a quarter of people aged from 6 to 49 in the US, 200 million Chinese, and 62 million Indian (6 million children) are currently at risk of varying degrees of fluorosis [4], [5]. Therefore, there is an urgent need for research on the hazards and prevention measures of fluorosis.
Epidemiologic studies and animal experiments have demonstrated multi-systemic toxicity of fluoride including teeth and bones [6], brain [7], male reproduction [8], [9], [10] and the digestive system [11]. However, as the main organ of fluoride metabolism, damage to the hepatic and gastrointestinal tract is of paramount importance in both animals and humans [12], [13]. Fluoride has been reported to disrupt liver morphology and ultrastructure, hepatocyte steatosis, apoptosis, and autophagy, leading to inflammatory cell infiltration [8], [12], [14]. Meanwhile, fluoride exposures destroyed the intestinal structure and altered the composition of the intestinal microflora [11], [15], [16]. Noteworthy, the gut-liver axis is an extensive and intimate intercommunication between the liver and gut that controls gastrointestinal health and disease [17]. Bile acids (BAs) links the physiological activities in the gut-liver axis or enterohepatic circulation. Recently, a number of liver diseases have been reported to be associated with disruption of the gut-liver axis [18]. However, there are gaps in the literature on the effects of fluoride on the hepatointestinal circulation and possible mechanisms.
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin), as a classical water-soluble vitamin, showed the potential to alleviate fluoride-induced pathological changes in various organs due to its anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and participatory functions in lipid and energy metabolism in our previous studies [19], [20], [21]. However, the mitigating effect of vitamin B2 on hepatointestinal injury induced by fluoride and the intervention mechanism remain unclear. In addition, we found that IL-17A was involved in fluoride-induced damage to the testis [22], liver [23] and intestine [24]. IL-17A may regulate the onset and progression of various intestinal diseases by participating in the antimicrobial protective response and maintenance of the intestinal barrier, and the gut microbiota has been implicated as an important regulator of IL-17A production and function [25], [26]. Unfortunately, it is not clear whether IL-17A and gut microbiome are involved in fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorders and vitamin B2 mitigation.
Therefore, the morphological and functional changes of liver and gut, total bile acid (TBA) biosynthesis, metabolism, transport, and regulation of FXR-FGF15 signaling pathways were firstly evaluated based on fluoride and/or vitamin B2-treated IL-17A knockout and wild-type mouse models. Furthermore, we re-examined the above indicators again by establishing a Bifidobacteria supplementation fluoride-treated mouse model according to 16 S rDNA sequence results of ileal contents. The purpose is to explore whether fluoride can disrupt hepatointestinal circulation of bile acids and vitamin B2 can mitigate hepatointestinal injury by inhibiting IL-17A and regulating ileal microbiome. The study will reveal the novel hepatointestinal toxicological mechanism of fluoride and effective strategy to alleviate fluorosis.
Materials and Methods
Mouse models
Thirty-two 6-week-old male healthy wild type (WT) mice (C57BL/6J, SPF) from Beijing Experimental Animal Center were randomly divided equally into control, NaF, Ribo (Riboflavin or vitamin B2), and NaF + Ribo groups. After one week of acclimatisation, each group of mice was given an aqueous solution containing 0.9 % saline, 24 mg/kg bw NaF, 5 mg/kg bw riboflavin sodium phosphate (vitamin B2), and combined with fluorine and vitamin B2, respectively, by gavage. Meanwhile, 32 6-week-old male IL-17A knockout (IL-17A−/−) mice were selected from the mice, reared and identified for the same grouping and treatment. After 13 weeks, all mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Serum was centrifuged and stored at −80 °C for further analysis. Livers, intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and ileum) and gut contents were stored at −80 °C and fixed by 10 % formalin solution for histological evaluation.
For the Bifidobacteria supplementation fluoride-treated mouse model, 32 6 weeks old C57BL/6J mice were divided into Ctrl, NaF, and NaF + Ba groups, randomly. The control mice received free access to deionized water, while NaF and NaF + Ba group mice received 24 mg/kg·bw NaF of deionized water. After 10 weeks, the mouse in NaF + Ba group was given additionally 0.2 mL of bifidobacterium solution (1 × 109 CFU/mL bifidobacterium) by oral gavage every day, and the other groups were given the same amount of distilled water in the same way for comparison. After 8 weeks, the same required mouse samples as described above were collected. All mice were housed in a 12-hour cycle of light and dark, 22 ± 1 °C, and had free access to food and water.
Ethics statement
This work has received research ethics approval from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Shanxi Agricultural University (IACUC20200305).
Histopathological examination
Liver, duodenum, ileum and jejunum tissues of mice were immersed in 10 % formalin solution and made into 5 µm paraffin sections after 24 h. The sections were analyzed by light microscopy after being infiltrated with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining solution.
Biochemical assays
Biochemical assays kits (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, China) were used to detect serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), Total bile acid (TBA), total bilirubin (TBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL), total cholesterol (T-CHO), total protein (TP), and liver T-CHO and TBA in mice according to a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher, United States of America).
16S rDNA sequencing
250 mg of ileal contents per sample were selected for microbiota genomic DNA extraction using special DNA Kit (D4015, Omega, Inc., USA). The DNA sample quality and concentration was detected using NanoDrop ND 2000 (Thermo Fisher, USA), The good quality DNA samples were sent to Hangzhou Lc-Bio Technologies company (China) for 16S rDNA microbial diversity analysis, and the samples were sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq platform (Illumina, USA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Sequencing analysis
The overlap is used to splice the double-ended data, and perform quality control and chimera filtering to obtain high-quality clean data. Divisive Amplicon Denoising Algorithm (DADA2) clusters sequences through steps such as “de-duplication” (equivalent to 100 % similar clustering), and obtains representative sequences with single-base precision. Then, the concept of Amplicon Sequence Variants (ASVs) is used to construct the Operational Taxonomic Units (OTU) table for diversity analysis, species taxonomic annotation, and variance analysis.
Real-time PCR
Total RNA of tissues was extracted by TRIZOL (Beijing Kangwei Century Biotechnology Co., Ltd, China). Analysis of total RNA quality and concentration by Nano Drop 2000 (Thermo Fisher, USA). The cDNA samples were produced by the PrimeScript RT Master Mix Kit. The real-time PCR was run by using MX3000Pro PCR system (Stratagene Company, USA). All special primers were designed online using Primer 3 Plus based on the complete mouse cDNA sequences retrieved from GenBank and synthesized by Shanghai Sangong Biotechnology Co.. The primers information was shown in Table 1. The reaction conditions of Real-time PCR are below: At 95 °C 10 s for initial denaturation and then at 95 °C for 5 s, decreased by 61 °C for 20 s, and increased by 72 °C for 6 s for 40 cycles. Finally, the melting curve was analyzed. CT values were analyzed by ΔΔCT method. β-actin was looked as a calibrator.Table 1Primer sequences for Real-time PCR.Gene namePrimer sequencesAccession No.Product sizes (bp)β-actinF:TACCCAGGCATTGCTGACAGR:ACTCCTGCTTGCTGATCCACNM_007393.598  CYP7A1F:ACACCATTCCTGCAACCTTCR:TTGGCCAGCACTCTGTAATGNM_007824.3107  CYP8B1F:AGCTCCTGGTGTGAAGATGGR:GGTCTTGCTGCTTGTCCTTGNM_010012.3103  FXRF:ACTCCGGACATTCAACCATCR:CTGCACATCCCAGATCTCACNM_001385711.1100  SHPF:GTTGCACCTGCATCTCACAGR:ACCTCGAAGGTCACAGCATCNM_011850.3121  NTCPF:ATGCCTTTCACTGGCTTCCR:CTGTTTCCATGCTGATGGTGNM_011387.291  BSEPF:GGACAATGATGTGCTTGTGGR:AGGGCCATTCTGAGATGTTGNM_021022.380  ASBTF:CATGACCACTTGCTCCACACR:AATCGTTCCCGAGTCAACCNM_011388.391  IBABPF:GTCTTCCAGGAGACGTGATTGR:CCGAAGTCTGGTGATAGTTGGNM_008375.2114  FGF15F:GTTTCACCGCTCCTTCTTTGR:CATCCTCCACCATCCTGAACNM_008003.2104  MRP2F:AAGCAGGTGTTCGTTGTGTGR:ACAGGAGGAATTGTGGCTTGNM_013806.295  OSTαF:TGCATCTGGGTGAACAGAACR:AGCGATCTGCCCACTGTTAGNM_145932.3116  OSTβF:GACCTGCATCTTGATGACTCCR:GGCCAAGTCTGGTTTCTCTGNM_178933.290  FGFR4F:ACTGTCAAATTCCGCTGTCCR:TGCCTCCAATACGATTCTCCNM_008011.2100
Primer sequences for Real-time PCR.
Primer sequences for Real-time PCR.
Gene namePrimer sequencesAccession No.Product sizes (bp)β-actinF:TACCCAGGCATTGCTGACAGR:ACTCCTGCTTGCTGATCCACNM_007393.598  CYP7A1F:ACACCATTCCTGCAACCTTCR:TTGGCCAGCACTCTGTAATGNM_007824.3107  CYP8B1F:AGCTCCTGGTGTGAAGATGGR:GGTCTTGCTGCTTGTCCTTGNM_010012.3103  FXRF:ACTCCGGACATTCAACCATCR:CTGCACATCCCAGATCTCACNM_001385711.1100  SHPF:GTTGCACCTGCATCTCACAGR:ACCTCGAAGGTCACAGCATCNM_011850.3121  NTCPF:ATGCCTTTCACTGGCTTCCR:CTGTTTCCATGCTGATGGTGNM_011387.291  BSEPF:GGACAATGATGTGCTTGTGGR:AGGGCCATTCTGAGATGTTGNM_021022.380  ASBTF:CATGACCACTTGCTCCACACR:AATCGTTCCCGAGTCAACCNM_011388.391  IBABPF:GTCTTCCAGGAGACGTGATTGR:CCGAAGTCTGGTGATAGTTGGNM_008375.2114  FGF15F:GTTTCACCGCTCCTTCTTTGR:CATCCTCCACCATCCTGAACNM_008003.2104  MRP2F:AAGCAGGTGTTCGTTGTGTGR:ACAGGAGGAATTGTGGCTTGNM_013806.295  OSTαF:TGCATCTGGGTGAACAGAACR:AGCGATCTGCCCACTGTTAGNM_145932.3116  OSTβF:GACCTGCATCTTGATGACTCCR:GGCCAAGTCTGGTTTCTCTGNM_178933.290  FGFR4F:ACTGTCAAATTCCGCTGTCCR:TGCCTCCAATACGATTCTCCNM_008011.2100
Western blotting
Liver and ileum tissue samples were homogenized with lysis buffer (RIPA: PMSF=100:1) and centrifuged at 4 °C, 12,000 g for 10 min. The protein concentrations were quantified at a wavelength of 562 nm by the BCA kit (Boster, China). 40 μg total protein samples were performed to 10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After that, the proteins in gel were transferred to the nitrocellulose membranes (NC) and then blocked with 5 %-nonfat dry milk formulated with phosphate buffered solution (PBST) for 2 h at room temperature (RT). The membranes were incubated with Rabbit anti-FXR (bs-12867R, 1:800, Bioss, China), Rabbit anti-SHP antibody (bs-12867R, 1:500, Bioss, China) and Rabbit anti-GAPDH (10494-1-AP, 1:3000, Proteintech, China) antibodies overnight at 4 °C. After rinsed with PBST 3 times for 10 min each, HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (RS0002, Immunoway, USA) were used to incubated the membranes at RT for 2 h. After rinsed 3 times for 10 min each again the protein bands were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Seven Biotechnology, Beijing, China) under FluorChem Q Imaging system (FCQ, ProteinSimple, USA). The bands images were acquired and quantifed by using FCQ analysis software.
Statistical analysis
Experimental data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad 7. One-way ANOVA (analysis of variance) and multiple comparisons were used. *P <0.05 & **P <0.01 & ***P <0.001, and ★P <0.05, ★★P <0.01 & ★★★P <0.001 indicate significant differences compared to the controls of WT, and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively. #
P <0.05, ##
P <0.01 & ###
P <0.001, and ▲P <0.05, ▲▲P <0.01 & ▲▲▲P <0.001 point to significant differences compared to the NaF groups in WT, and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively.
Results
Fluoride induced impairment in liver function and vitamin B2 mitigation dependent on IL-17A
H&E staining were employed to detect the morphological changes of the liver (Fig. 1A). In the WT mice, the hepatocytes are arrayed regularly around the central vein with the round shape, clear cell boundary, and round or oval nuclei in the control and NaF + Ribo groups, while the histopathological lesions, manifested as disordered arrangement of hepatocytes, blurred boundary, steatosis, and necrosis, nuclear pyknosis and dissolution, and enlargement of central venous vessels occurred in liver tissues of the NaF group. Central vein was unexpectedly enlarged in the Ribo group compared to control. In IL-17A−/− mice, there were no obvious morphological differences in liver tissues between the control group and all treatment groups. The results indicate that vitamin B2 supplementation restores fluoride-induced histopathologic alteration in hepatocytes and does not affect the protection of knockdown IL-17A against fluoride injury to the liver.Fig. 1Fluoride induces liver injury and vitamin B2 intervention in wild-type (WT) and IL-17A−/− mice. (A) The morphological features of liver tissue by H&E staining. a1–h1 are representative images of the control group, sodium fluoride (NaF) group, riboflavin (Ribo) group, NaF + Ribo group of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (200×). a2–h2 show the local magnification of the visual field of the corresponding groups (400×). Black arrows indicate nuclear condensation. (B–F) Serum concentration levels of liver function indices alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL) and total protein (TP) in WT and IL-17A−/− mice (n = 6).
Fluoride induces liver injury and vitamin B2 intervention in wild-type (WT) and IL-17A−/− mice. (A) The morphological features of liver tissue by H&E staining. a1–h1 are representative images of the control group, sodium fluoride (NaF) group, riboflavin (Ribo) group, NaF + Ribo group of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (200×). a2–h2 show the local magnification of the visual field of the corresponding groups (400×). Black arrows indicate nuclear condensation. (B–F) Serum concentration levels of liver function indices alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL) and total protein (TP) in WT and IL-17A−/− mice (n = 6).
Fluoride induces liver injury and vitamin B2 intervention in wild-type (WT) and IL-17A−/− mice. (A) The morphological features of liver tissue by H&E staining. a1–h1 are representative images of the control group, sodium fluoride (NaF) group, riboflavin (Ribo) group, NaF + Ribo group of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (200×). a2–h2 show the local magnification of the visual field of the corresponding groups (400×). Black arrows indicate nuclear condensation. (B–F) Serum concentration levels of liver function indices alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL) and total protein (TP) in WT and IL-17A−/− mice (n = 6).
The serum ALT, AST, TBIL, DBIL and TP concentrations were used to evaluate the physiological function of the liver. In results, serum AST and ALT activities were upregulated (Fig. 1B–1C, P <0.05, P <0.001), TBIL content was significantly decreased, and TP and DBIL concentrations were not changed in the NaF group compared to control (P <0.05) in WT mice, while in the NaF + Ribo group, ALT, TBIL, and DBIL levels were similar to the controls except for abnormally elevated AST and TP (Fig. 1D–1F). The increased levels of ALT and TP and decreased DBIL levels were found in the Ribo group. Nevertheless, the serum concentration of AST, ALT, TP, TBIL and DBIL are not statistically different among all IL-17A−/− mice groups. These results suggest that fluoride caused morphological structural and functional impairment of liver and vitamin B2 supplementation provided better relief but did not fully restore liver function without IL-17A knockout.
Fluoride altered morphological structure gut and vitamin B2 protection together with IL-17A
The histomorphometric structure of the ileum, duodenum, jejunum, and colon tissues in mice were shown in Fig. 2A, Figs. S1 and S2. The intestinal epithelial cells of WT mice in NaF group were disorderly arrayed with the blurred edge of the nucleus, the reduced height of the intestinal villi, the damaged structure, and rupture to varying degrees. The histomorphometric structure of the gut (ileum, duodenum, jejunum, and colon) in the other groups appears to be normal without significant injury. The crypt depth (CD), villus height (VH), and VH/CD ratio are important parameters measured for the morphological integrity and physiological functions of gut. As shown in Fig. 2B–2D, the VH/CD ratio of ileum of WT mice was significantly reduced in NaF and Ribo groups (P <0.05), and increased to normal level in NaF + Ribo group compared to the control group. Duodenum and jejunum parameters did not show any significant difference in among the other groups in both WT and IL-17A−/− mice.Fig. 2Fluoride alters the morphologic structure of intestinal tissues and vitamin B2 alleviation in WT and IL-17A−/− mice. (A) The representative morphological images of the small intestine in mice by H&E staining (200×). Black arrows indicate the absence of intestinal epithelial cell nuclei. (B–D) The ratio of villus height (VH) to crypt depth (CD) in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum tissues of mice. VH: the villus tip to the valley between individual villi, CD: the valley between individual villi to the basolateral membrane. Three mice per group, 6 sections per tissue, 6 visual fields per section were randomly selected to examine and analyze the changes in VH/CD.
Fluoride alters the morphologic structure of intestinal tissues and vitamin B2 alleviation in WT and IL-17A−/− mice. (A) The representative morphological images of the small intestine in mice by H&E staining (200×). Black arrows indicate the absence of intestinal epithelial cell nuclei. (B–D) The ratio of villus height (VH) to crypt depth (CD) in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum tissues of mice. VH: the villus tip to the valley between individual villi, CD: the valley between individual villi to the basolateral membrane. Three mice per group, 6 sections per tissue, 6 visual fields per section were randomly selected to examine and analyze the changes in VH/CD.
Fluoride alters the morphologic structure of intestinal tissues and vitamin B2 alleviation in WT and IL-17A−/− mice. (A) The representative morphological images of the small intestine in mice by H&E staining (200×). Black arrows indicate the absence of intestinal epithelial cell nuclei. (B–D) The ratio of villus height (VH) to crypt depth (CD) in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum tissues of mice. VH: the villus tip to the valley between individual villi, CD: the valley between individual villi to the basolateral membrane. Three mice per group, 6 sections per tissue, 6 visual fields per section were randomly selected to examine and analyze the changes in VH/CD.
Muscle layer thickness values were significantly thinned in ileum of three treatment groups (P <0.05), duodenum of NaF group (P <0.05), and colon of the Ribo (P <0.01) and NaF + Ribo group (P <0.05) compared to corresponding controls, while no significant difference occurred in other groups both WT and IL-17A−/− mice (Figs. S1 and S2). Muscle layer and muscularis thickness of gut tissues were not been affected in all groups. These results show that fluoride-induced morphological changes are more severe in ileum than in duodenum, jejunum and colon tissues, and vitamin B2 supplementation together with IL-17A inhibition can protect against fluoride-induced gut damage.
Vitamin B2 regulated fluoride-induced ileal microbiome alteration unrelated to IL-17A
To further confirm the sensitivity of the ileum, we analyzed the microbiome in the ileum contents by 16 S rDNA sequencing. The ratio of valid data to original data in all samples was more than 80 %, and the proportion of data with quality ≥ Q20 and Q30% accounted for more than 91 % in valid data (Table S1). The features numbers of the control, NaF, Ribo and NaF + Ribo groups in WT and IL-17A−/− mice were 964, 1001, 1287, 1061, 1038, 1565, 1328 and 974, respectively. And there were 172 common features among eight groups (Fig. 3A). Chao 1 and Shannon indexes of all samples tended to be stable with the increase of sequence in Fig. 3B and 3D. Compared to other groups, there was significant separation of sample clusters in NaF group of WT mice and control group of IL-17A−/− mice (P = 0.001, Fig. 3C). All these data features show that the sequencing data are of high quality and can be further analyzed.Fig. 3Vitamin B2 regulates fluoride-induced ileal microbiome changes independent of IL-17A. (A) Venn diagram of mouse ileal microbiome by bioinformatics analysis and showing the number of common and specific features in each group. Each different colored circle represents the number of features in the corresponding groups. The number in the overlapping part of the section represents 172 common features among eight groups. (B, D) The alpha diversity analysis of ileal microbiome in fluoride-exposed WT and KO mice. The Chao1 rarefaction curve reflects the species abundance information of the samples, and Shannon index reflects the diversity of the samples. (C) The beta diversity analysis of ileal microorganism. Principal component analysis (PCA) plots were made based on the unweighted unifrac distance. (E, F) The relative abundance of the dominant bacterium in mouse ileal contents was based on the Phylum and genus levels, respectively. The red quadrilaterals show meaningful changes in the microbes corresponding to the individual comparisons. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Vitamin B2 regulates fluoride-induced ileal microbiome changes independent of IL-17A. (A) Venn diagram of mouse ileal microbiome by bioinformatics analysis and showing the number of common and specific features in each group. Each different colored circle represents the number of features in the corresponding groups. The number in the overlapping part of the section represents 172 common features among eight groups. (B, D) The alpha diversity analysis of ileal microbiome in fluoride-exposed WT and KO mice. The Chao1 rarefaction curve reflects the species abundance information of the samples, and Shannon index reflects the diversity of the samples. (C) The beta diversity analysis of ileal microorganism. Principal component analysis (PCA) plots were made based on the unweighted unifrac distance. (E, F) The relative abundance of the dominant bacterium in mouse ileal contents was based on the Phylum and genus levels, respectively. The red quadrilaterals show meaningful changes in the microbes corresponding to the individual comparisons. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Vitamin B2 regulates fluoride-induced ileal microbiome changes independent of IL-17A. (A) Venn diagram of mouse ileal microbiome by bioinformatics analysis and showing the number of common and specific features in each group. Each different colored circle represents the number of features in the corresponding groups. The number in the overlapping part of the section represents 172 common features among eight groups. (B, D) The alpha diversity analysis of ileal microbiome in fluoride-exposed WT and KO mice. The Chao1 rarefaction curve reflects the species abundance information of the samples, and Shannon index reflects the diversity of the samples. (C) The beta diversity analysis of ileal microorganism. Principal component analysis (PCA) plots were made based on the unweighted unifrac distance. (E, F) The relative abundance of the dominant bacterium in mouse ileal contents was based on the Phylum and genus levels, respectively. The red quadrilaterals show meaningful changes in the microbes corresponding to the individual comparisons. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
The relative abundance of the bacteria analysis at the phylum level showed that the dominant bacteria were Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia and Actinobacteria in the ileum. The Bray-Curtis distance was closest in the NaF group of WT and KO mice, NaF + Ribo group of WT and KO mice, and Ribo and control group of KO mice, respectively. The abundances of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes in the control group were significantly different from the other groups (Fig. 3E). This indicates that the effect of IL-17A knockout on the microbial abundance of ileus is much less than that of fluoride and/or vitamin B2.
At the genus level, the microbial composition (top 30 species) of ileus presents a clear difference between groups, especially in Akkermansiam, Lactobacillus, and Bifidobacterium. In WT mice, the Bray Curtis distance in NaF + NaF + Ribo group was closest to the control group, although both NaF and Ribo groups differed markedly from the control. In IL-17A−/− mice, both the NaF group and controls show a close Bray Curtis distance between Ribo and NaF + Ribo groups (Fig. 3F). Most obviously, the abundance of Bifidobacterium was significantly reduced in all treatment groups compare to the controls, except that the NaF + Ribo group is slightly decreased. The above results indicate that vitamin B2 protects against fluoride-induced changes in the abundance of ileal microbiome, especially in the Firmicutes phylum and Bifidobacterium genus, and IL-17A has a limited influence on this process.
Fluoride interfered total bile acid synthesis and vitamin B2 alleviation
To further investigate if fluoride affects enterohepatic circulation, total bile acid (TBA) levels and synthesis were examined. The results showed that serum and liver TBA concentrations were notably elevated in the NaF group (P <0.01, P <0.001), and decreased to normal levels in the NaF + Ribo group, respectively, in comparison with the controls in WT mice. Serum TBA levels were elevated in the IL-17A−/− NaF group compared to the corresponding controls, while there are no obvious differences in the Ribo and NaF + Ribo groups, as well as in liver TBA levels of other groups (Fig. 4A–4B).Fig. 4Fluoride altered total bile acid (TBA) synthesis and effect of Vitamin B2 supplementation. (A–D) Changes of TBA and total cholesterol (T-CHO) contents in serum and liver tissue of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (n = 6). (E–F) The mRNA expression levels of TBA biosynthesis regulating genes CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in liver tissues of mice by real-time PCR. β-action was used as a housekeeping gene.
Fluoride altered total bile acid (TBA) synthesis and effect of Vitamin B2 supplementation. (A–D) Changes of TBA and total cholesterol (T-CHO) contents in serum and liver tissue of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (n = 6). (E–F) The mRNA expression levels of TBA biosynthesis regulating genes CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in liver tissues of mice by real-time PCR. β-action was used as a housekeeping gene.
Fluoride altered total bile acid (TBA) synthesis and effect of Vitamin B2 supplementation. (A–D) Changes of TBA and total cholesterol (T-CHO) contents in serum and liver tissue of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (n = 6). (E–F) The mRNA expression levels of TBA biosynthesis regulating genes CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in liver tissues of mice by real-time PCR. β-action was used as a housekeeping gene.
Serum T-CHO concentrations were decreased remarkably in NaF group (P <0.01) and liver T-CHO levels were increased significantly in NaF and NaF + Ribo groups (P <0.001) compared to controls. Similarly, in the IL-17A−/− mice, liver T-CHO levels were upregulated (P <0.001) and serum T-CHO concentrations were decreased (P <0.01) in the NaF group, compared to controls. The Liver T-CHO level in the NaF + Ribo group was upregulated than that in the Ribo group (P <0.001), while serum and liver T-CHO levels in the other groups were no significant differences (Fig. 4C–4D).
In WT and IL-17A−/− mice, the mRNA expressions of BA synthesis genes CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in NaF groups were upregulated than those in control groups (P <0.001, P <0.01). Compared to corresponding NaF groups, CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 mRNA levels were remarkably decreased (P <0.05, P <0.01) in NaF + Ribo groups (Fig. 4E–4F). The above data suggests that vitamin B2 supplementation alleviates fluoride-induced alteration in TBA synthesis both in WT and IL-17A knockout mice.
Fluoride changed bile acid transporters and vitamin B2 mitigation dependent on IL-17A in liver and ileum
To clarify how fluoride interferes with enterohepatic circulation, the expression levels of genes coding for bile acid transporters BSEP, MRP2, NTCP in liver, and ASBT, IBABP, OSTα, OSTβ in ileum were determined. Study results showed that the relative mRNA expressions of BAs transporters BSEP, MRP2, ASBT, IBABP, OSTβ and NTCP were markedly higher in the NaF group than that in the control group of WT mice (Fig. 5A–5G). Compared to the NaF group, ASBT, IBABP and NTCP mRNA expression levels were markedly decreased in NaF + Ribo group (P <0.05P <0.001). BSEP, ASBT, IBABP, OSTα and OSTβ mRNA expressions were markedly higher in the Ribo group (P <0.05, P <0.01, P <0.001) than in the control group. In IL-17A−/− mice, except for the unexpectedly increased expression of BSEP in Ribo group, the expression levels of MRP2, ASBT, IBABP, OSTα, OSTβ, and NTCP did not show significant differences among four groups. The illustrates that fluoride interferes with enterohepatic circulation by enhancing bile acid transporter expression levels in liver and ileum, and vitamin B2 supplement could mitigate changes to some extent. In addition, IL-17A plays the important role in this process.Fig. 5Fluoride induced changes in bile acid transporters in liver and ileum and Vitamin B2 attenuation. (A-G) The mRNA expression levels of bile acid transporter genes BSEP, MRP2, NTCP in liver, and ASBT, IBABP, OSTα, OSTβ in ileum of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (n = 6). (H) Schematic diagram of bile acid (BA) transport and regulatory function of BSEP, MRP2, NTCP ASBT, IBABP, OSTα and OSTβ genes in liver, ileum, and blood.
Fluoride induced changes in bile acid transporters in liver and ileum and Vitamin B2 attenuation. (A-G) The mRNA expression levels of bile acid transporter genes BSEP, MRP2, NTCP in liver, and ASBT, IBABP, OSTα, OSTβ in ileum of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (n = 6). (H) Schematic diagram of bile acid (BA) transport and regulatory function of BSEP, MRP2, NTCP ASBT, IBABP, OSTα and OSTβ genes in liver, ileum, and blood.
Fluoride induced changes in bile acid transporters in liver and ileum and Vitamin B2 attenuation. (A-G) The mRNA expression levels of bile acid transporter genes BSEP, MRP2, NTCP in liver, and ASBT, IBABP, OSTα, OSTβ in ileum of WT and IL-17A−/− mice, respectively (n = 6). (H) Schematic diagram of bile acid (BA) transport and regulatory function of BSEP, MRP2, NTCP ASBT, IBABP, OSTα and OSTβ genes in liver, ileum, and blood.
Fluoride disrupted enterohepatic circulation by increasing FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway via IL-17A and vitamin B2 intervention
To elucidate the mechanism by which fluoride interferes with enterohepatic circulation, the FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway, which regulates BA transport, was further studied. In WT mice, FXR and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in NaF group and FXR in Ribo group were higher (P <0.05, P <0.01) than the controls in ileum. While FXR and FGF15 mRNA expressions were markedly decreased in NaF + Ribo group (P <0.05, P <0.001) compared to the NaF group (Fig. 6A–6B). In liver, FXR and FGFR4 expressions were upregulated in NaF group (P <0.01, P <0.001) and then returned to normal levels in NaF + Ribo group. Meanwhile, FXR and SHP expressions in Ribo group (P <0.05) and SHP expression in NaF + Ribo group (P <0.001) were also extraordinarily upregulated compared to the controls (Fig. 6C–6E). In IL-17A−/− mice, besides FXR and FGFR4 mRNA expressions were markedly increased in Ribo group (P <0.01, P <0.05), there were no significant differences in FXR and FGF15 expressions in ileum, and FGFR4, FXR, and SHP expressions in liver in all treatment groups compared to the controls.Fig. 6Effects of fluoride on FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway on regulating bile acid circulation in fluoride-treated IL-17A−/− mice. (A–B) Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in ileum tissues. (C–E) FGFR4, RXR and SHP mRNA expression levels in liver tissues (n = 6). (F–G) Changes in protein expression levels of RXR and SHP in the liver detected by Western blotting (n = 4). (H) Schematic diagram of the FXR signaling pathway regulating hepatoenteric circulation. Excessive bile acids (BAs) activate the expression of FXR in liver and ileum, increase the expression of SHP in liver, induce the transcription of enterokine-FGF15 by binding to FXR in enterocytes, which down-regulate de novo BAs synthesis by inhibiting CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in hepatocytes, and form a feedback system to modulate BA production.
Effects of fluoride on FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway on regulating bile acid circulation in fluoride-treated IL-17A−/− mice. (A–B) Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in ileum tissues. (C–E) FGFR4, RXR and SHP mRNA expression levels in liver tissues (n = 6). (F–G) Changes in protein expression levels of RXR and SHP in the liver detected by Western blotting (n = 4). (H) Schematic diagram of the FXR signaling pathway regulating hepatoenteric circulation. Excessive bile acids (BAs) activate the expression of FXR in liver and ileum, increase the expression of SHP in liver, induce the transcription of enterokine-FGF15 by binding to FXR in enterocytes, which down-regulate de novo BAs synthesis by inhibiting CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in hepatocytes, and form a feedback system to modulate BA production.
Effects of fluoride on FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway on regulating bile acid circulation in fluoride-treated IL-17A−/− mice. (A–B) Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in ileum tissues. (C–E) FGFR4, RXR and SHP mRNA expression levels in liver tissues (n = 6). (F–G) Changes in protein expression levels of RXR and SHP in the liver detected by Western blotting (n = 4). (H) Schematic diagram of the FXR signaling pathway regulating hepatoenteric circulation. Excessive bile acids (BAs) activate the expression of FXR in liver and ileum, increase the expression of SHP in liver, induce the transcription of enterokine-FGF15 by binding to FXR in enterocytes, which down-regulate de novo BAs synthesis by inhibiting CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 in hepatocytes, and form a feedback system to modulate BA production.
FXR and SHP protein expression levels in liver were further confirmed and shown in Fig. 6F–6G. FXR expression was significantly elevated in the NaF group (P <0.05), but no remarkable changes were detected in Ribo and NaF + Ribo groups compared to the controls in WT mice. FXR expression was significantly decreased in NaF + Ribo group (P <0.001), compared to the NaF group. SHP expression was significantly higher in the NaF + Ribo group than that in the control and NaF groups. There was no difference in FXR and SHP expressions between groups of IL-17A−/− mice. These results indicate that fluoride exposure can interfere with enterohepatic circulation by activating FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway via IL-17A, vitamin B2 supplementation has better mitigation except the slight adverse effects on liver alone.
Bifidobacterium supplementation reversed fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder via FXR-FGF15 signaling pathways
To prove the regulating role of ileal microbiome in fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder, TBA synthesis and FXR-FGF15 signaling pathways were further detected in fluoride exposed mice after Bifidobacterium (Ba) supplementation according to ileal microbiome sequencing results (Fig. 7). As shown in Fig. 7A and 7D, the liver and ileum morphology in the NaF group was significantly altered, with characteristics similar to those in Fig. 1A–1B, respectively, while the histological features of liver and ileum in the NaF + Ba group were consistent with the control group. The mucosal and muscle thickness, VH, and VH/CD ratio of ileum were reduced in the NaF group, while there were no changes in the NaF + Ba group compare to the controls (Fig. 7E–7F). Meanwhile, the increase of TBA concentrations in serum and liver (P <0.05, P <0.0001), CYP7A1 (P <0.05) and CYP8B1 (P <0.01) expressions in liver, and FXR and FGF15 expression levels in ileum (P <0.05), and the decreased serum T-CHO level (P <0.01) were observed in NaF groups. The levels of serum TBA, liver TBA, serum T-CHO, mucosal and muscle thickness, VH, VH/CD, liver CYP8B1 expression, and ileum FGF15 expression were markedly different in NaF + Ba group and NaF group (Fig. 7B–7C, Fig. 7G–7H). The above indicators in NaF + Ba group did not differ from those in the control group except for serum TBA, SHP and FGFR4 expression in liver. This implies that ileum Bifidobacterium play in important role in fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder.Fig. 7Bifidobacterium supplementation protects fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder via FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway. (A) The representative morphological images of liver tissue (H&E staining; A–C, 200×; a-C, 400×) in mice. (B–C) The concentrations of total BAs and T-CHO in serum and liver of mice. (D) The representative morphological images of the ileum in mice (200×). (E–F) Mucosal and muscular thickness and the ratio of VH to CD in ileal tissues. VH: the villus tip to the valley between individual villi, and CD: the valley between individual villi to the basolateral membrane. 6 visual fields per section of 6 sections per tissue from 3 mice per group were randomly selected for examination and analysis of VH/CD ratios. (G–H) The mRNA expression levels of CYP7A1, CYP8B1, FXR, SHP and FGFR4 in liver tissues. (I) FXR and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in ileum. Ctrl, control group; NaF, sodium fluoride group; NaF + Ba, sodium fluoride and Bifidobacterium group (n = 6).
Bifidobacterium supplementation protects fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder via FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway. (A) The representative morphological images of liver tissue (H&E staining; A–C, 200×; a-C, 400×) in mice. (B–C) The concentrations of total BAs and T-CHO in serum and liver of mice. (D) The representative morphological images of the ileum in mice (200×). (E–F) Mucosal and muscular thickness and the ratio of VH to CD in ileal tissues. VH: the villus tip to the valley between individual villi, and CD: the valley between individual villi to the basolateral membrane. 6 visual fields per section of 6 sections per tissue from 3 mice per group were randomly selected for examination and analysis of VH/CD ratios. (G–H) The mRNA expression levels of CYP7A1, CYP8B1, FXR, SHP and FGFR4 in liver tissues. (I) FXR and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in ileum. Ctrl, control group; NaF, sodium fluoride group; NaF + Ba, sodium fluoride and Bifidobacterium group (n = 6).
Bifidobacterium supplementation protects fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder via FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway. (A) The representative morphological images of liver tissue (H&E staining; A–C, 200×; a-C, 400×) in mice. (B–C) The concentrations of total BAs and T-CHO in serum and liver of mice. (D) The representative morphological images of the ileum in mice (200×). (E–F) Mucosal and muscular thickness and the ratio of VH to CD in ileal tissues. VH: the villus tip to the valley between individual villi, and CD: the valley between individual villi to the basolateral membrane. 6 visual fields per section of 6 sections per tissue from 3 mice per group were randomly selected for examination and analysis of VH/CD ratios. (G–H) The mRNA expression levels of CYP7A1, CYP8B1, FXR, SHP and FGFR4 in liver tissues. (I) FXR and FGF15 mRNA expression levels in ileum. Ctrl, control group; NaF, sodium fluoride group; NaF + Ba, sodium fluoride and Bifidobacterium group (n = 6).
Discussion
Fluorosis caused by chronic and excessive fluoride intake is a global public health disease [1]. Although the hepatotoxic or enterotoxic of fluoride has been reported by our previous studies [23], [24], [27], however, whether fluoride affects the hepatic-enteric circulation or gut-liver axis has not been reported. The present study first revealed that fluoride caused enterohepatic circulation disorder by altering total bile acid (TBA) synthesis, transporters, and FXR-FGF15 signaling regulation. Meanwhile, vitamin B2 supplementation attenuated fluoride-induced hepatointestinal injury. More interestingly, the ileum was found to be the most sensitive to fluoride in the gut tissues. Fluoride could lead to changes in the ileal microbiome, particularly the reduction of Bifidobacterium. Furthermore, Bifidobacterium supplementation reversed fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder. This study not only elucidates a novel mechanism by which fluoride causes hepatointestinal toxicity, but also provides a new physiological function of vitamin B2 that will be beneficial for therapy of fluorosis.
Interleukin-17A (IL-17A), produced primarily by Th17 cells, directly or indirectly induces various cytokines, inflammatory factors, and antimicrobial proteins to recognize target genes that mediate autoimmunity and chronic infection [28]. Previous research from our laboratory found that fluoride induced hepatocyte mitochondrial damage and mitophagy by activation of the IL-17A pathway [23]. IL-17A also may regulate the onset and development of various intestinal diseases [29]. The present study further discloses that IL-17A plays a crucial role in regulating fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder and vitamin B2 mitigation. Notably, all indicators including ALT and AST activities, TBIL, DBIL and TP concentrations, MRP2, ASBT, IBABP, OSTα, OSTβ, NTCP, FXR, FGF15, FGFR4 and SHP mRNA expressions, and FXR and SHP protein expressions were not affected by both fluoride treatment and vitamin B2 supplementation in IL-17A knockout mice. These results suggests that IL-17A participates in the vitamin B2 intervention process of TBA biosynthesis, metabolism, transport and regulation of FXR-FGF15 signaling. As for the relationship between riboflavin and IL-17A further studies are required.
The liver is the major organ for hematopoiesis and as well as for nutrients and exogenous toxins [30]. Long-term excessive fluoride broke hepatocytes into pieces with unclear cell boundaries and slightly stained nuclei, and significantly increased serum AST, ALT and TBIL [23], [31]. In this study, fluoride caused morphological structural and functional impairment of the liver, which is consistent with the previous report [32]. Moreover, our study further found that vitamin B2 supplementation could alleviate fluoride-induced liver damage depending on IL-17A knockout. Nevertheless, vitamin B2 did not completely restore the liver function damage, and even some biochemical indicators (e.g., AST, DBIL, TP) were abnormally changed after vitamin B2 supplementation. The possible reasons are: 1) an inappropriate dose of vitamin B2 was used; 2) vitamin B2 and fluoride have a synergistic effect on other tissues, which increases the burden on other organs and leads to abnormalities in related indicators in serum [21].
70–75 % of fluoride enters the gut and is absorbed in the small intestine [24], [33]. This study showed that fluoride-induced morphological changes in ileum was more severe than in duodenum, jejunum, and colon tissues. The changes in ileal absorptive capacity parameters are consistent with previous studies [24], [34]. Meanwhile, we found that vitamin B2 supplementation together with IL-17A inhibition can protect fluoride-induced gut damage. This also supports our previous experiment [21]. In addition, normal intestinal microorganisms can synthesize a variety of vitamins and essential amino acids and are easily affected by many factors, including diet and environmental chemicals [35]. Fluoride has been reported to cause microflora disorder in cecum, rectum and colon [11], [13], [36]. Therefore, we further investigated the ileal microbiome and found that vitamin B2 upregulated the abundance of Dubosiella, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, and downregulated the abundance of Akkermansia, Paramuribaculum, Desulfovibrio and Saccharimonadales in ileum of fluoride-treated mice. Dysregulated carbohydrate metabolism has been associated with liver and intestinal diseases due to imbalances in the gut flora [18], [37]. Thus, fluoride caused hepatointestinal injury and vitamin B2 intervention by altering the ileal microbiome.
The enterohepatic circulation of BAs helps to structure the gut-liver axis [38]. BAs are synthesized in liver, absorbed mainly by ileum, and returned to the liver via the portal veins [17]. So the balance of BAs metabolism plays a major role in the enterohepatic circulation by promoting intestinal absorption of fat soluble nutrients [39]. The interaction of BAs with gut flora regulates lipid, glucose and energy metabolism [40]. Disorders of BAs metabolism and impaired enterohepatic circulation led to intrahepatic cholestasis, dyslipidemia, diabetes and fatty liver diseases [41]. In the present study, vitamin B2 significantly attenuated the increase of TBA concentrations and the decrease of T-CHO concentrations in serum and liver with decreased BA synthetic enzymes CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 mRNA expressions, which suggesting that vitamin B2 reversed fluoride-induced excessive synthesis of BAs in mice.
The enterohepatic circulation of BAs requires the participation of BAs transporter [42]. The synthesized BAs in the liver are transported into bile duct through BSEP and MRP2, and then discharge into duodenum with bile after ingestion [43]. At the end of ileum, about 95 % of BAs are absorbed into intestinal epithelial cells through ASBT, combine with IBABP to promote BAs to transport to basolateral membrane through intestinal cells, and then are secreted to portal vein through OSTα/β, and are reabsorbed into hepatocytes through NTCP [41], [44]. In this study, vitamin B2 significantly suppressed the increase of NTCP, ASBT and IBABP mRNA expressions in the liver, which indicating that vitamin B2 relieved fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder of BAs through restoring absorption and transport in the small intestine, and reabsorption in liver of BAs.
BAs-regulated FXR-FGF15 signaling pathway participates in diverse aspects of the enterohepatic response [42]. BAs induced the increase of SHP expression through activation of FXR [45], and then inhibited the expression of BA synthase, which suppressed the synthesis of BAs in the liver [46]. In the ileum, BAs also activated the FXR expression, induced FGF15 expression through FXR activation, then promoted FGF15 to combine with FGFR4 in the liver cytoplasmic membrane, which further inhibited the expression of BAs synthase and BA synthesis [47]. Vitamin B2 significantly suppressed the increased FXR and FGF15 mRNA expressions in the ileum, and FXR and FGFR4 levels in the liver, and decreased SHP mRNA and protein expressions in the liver. This indicates that vitamin B2 relieved fluoride-induced excessive synthesis of BAs through FXR/FGF15/FGFR4/SHP signal pathway, consistent with the results of CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 mRNA expressions in this study.
It should be noted that the intestinal microflora regulated the composition and metabolism of BAs, and BAs also regulated the homeostasis of intestinal microflora [42], [48], [49]. Bifidobacterium and Akkermansia can convert conjugated BAs into free BAs [50], [51]. RSV relieved trimethylamine-N-oxide-induced BA synthesis disorder via gut microbiota remodeling via the FXR-FGF15 axis [52]. Moreover, Enterococcus faecium increased the abundance of Akkermansia, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Roseburia, then promoted cholesterol reverse transport and bile acid excretion through modulation of FXR-FGF15 axis in high-cholesterol diet mice [53]. Bifidobacterium is a beneficial bacterium with physiological benefits, including biological barriers, nutritional functions, immune-enhancing effects, and improvement of gastrointestinal function [54]. To investigate the role of Bifidobacterium in fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorders, Bifidobacterium supplementation fluoride-treated mice model was established in this study. Bifidobacterium treatment significantly attenuated fluoride-induced the structural damage of the liver and ileum, increased TBA concentrations in serum and liver, CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 expressions in liver, and FXR and FGF15 levels in ileum, and the decrease of serum T-CHO concentration, VH/CD, and mucosal and muscular thickness of ileum. Thus, we inferred that vitamin B2 mitigated fluoride-induced excessive synthesis of BAs through increasing Bifidobacterium-regulated FXR/FGF15/FGFR4/SHP signal pathway.
Conclusion
In summary, fluoride interfered with the enterohepatic circulation by altering BAs synthesis, BAs transporters, FXR-FGF15 signal regulation, and then led to liver and intestinal injury. The ileum was found to be the most sensitive and ileal microbiome was altered by fluoride, particularly the reduction of Bifidobacterium. Vitamin B2 mitigated fluoride-induced enterohepatic circulation disorder by IL-17A inhibition and ileal Bifidobacterium regulation (Fig. 8). The study revealed a novel toxicological mechanism of fluoride and the new physiological function of vitamin B2, which providing targets for the diagnosis and strategy prevention of fluorosis and other hepatoenterological diseases.Fig. 8Schematic diagram of fluoride-induced enterohepatic bile acid circulation disorder and vitamin B2 mitigation by inhibiting IL-17A and regulating Ileal Bifidobacterium. Bile acids (BA) are amphipathic molecules metabolized from cholesterol in the pericentral hepatocytes. The solid green arrows represent positive facilitation and the red or blue T-string represents negative feedback inhibition. IL-17A acts mainly in hepatic and ileal epithelial cells. Bile acid transporters are used to complete the hepatoenteric circulation and regulate bile acid production via the FXR signaling pathway. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Schematic diagram of fluoride-induced enterohepatic bile acid circulation disorder and vitamin B2 mitigation by inhibiting IL-17A and regulating Ileal Bifidobacterium. Bile acids (BA) are amphipathic molecules metabolized from cholesterol in the pericentral hepatocytes. The solid green arrows represent positive facilitation and the red or blue T-string represents negative feedback inhibition. IL-17A acts mainly in hepatic and ileal epithelial cells. Bile acid transporters are used to complete the hepatoenteric circulation and regulate bile acid production via the FXR signaling pathway. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Schematic diagram of fluoride-induced enterohepatic bile acid circulation disorder and vitamin B2 mitigation by inhibiting IL-17A and regulating Ileal Bifidobacterium. Bile acids (BA) are amphipathic molecules metabolized from cholesterol in the pericentral hepatocytes. The solid green arrows represent positive facilitation and the red or blue T-string represents negative feedback inhibition. IL-17A acts mainly in hepatic and ileal epithelial cells. Bile acid transporters are used to complete the hepatoenteric circulation and regulate bile acid production via the FXR signaling pathway. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Compliance with ethics requirement
The research protocol of experimental animal involved in this research project has been reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Shanxi Agricultural University, which conforms to the welfare and ethical principles of experimental animals. Approval No.: (IACUC 20200305).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
References
Supplementary material
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:Supplementary Data 1
Supplementary Data 1
Supplementary Data 1
Data availability
The raw sequencing data generated during and analysed during the current study is available in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive repository [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/PRJNA1026318]. Other raw datas and supplementary informations generated during and analysed during the current study are available in the Figshare repository [https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.24228859].
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 32072934), 10.13039/501100012166National Key R&D Program of China (Grant number 2023YFD1801100), the 10.13039/501100009997Earmarked Fund for Modern Agro-industry Technology Research System (2022–2024), Research Project Supported by 10.13039/501100003398Shanxi Scholarship Council of China (No. 2022-101), the Top Youth Talent Plan of Shanxi Province (2019–2022), the Applied Basic Research Project of Shanxi Province (No. 202203021212434;20210302123371) and Scientific Research Project of Shanxi Province Outstanding Doctoral Work Award Foundation (No. SXBYKY2022046).
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2024.07.034.